Good morning, this is OneRadioNetwork.com
The telephone number is 888-663-6386
Email patrick@oneradionetwork.com
Nothing is more expensive than bad information
Know the source, oneradionetwork.com
Well, welcome back, hour two of our little show
and it is the third Tuesday of the month
and that brings us to Dr. Ray Peat
who's been at this nutrition healing game for a very, very long time
Dr. Ray Peat, good morning
Good morning
How are you, Doc?
I'm very good
You're feeling, you're looking pretty good, we have a picture of you up there
Sorry we couldn't get Dr. Peat on the video
because you're much of a, somewhat of a luddite
you don't have a microphone or camera or any of that stuff
I have a new Dell monitor but it doesn't have a camera
Doesn't have a camera
or speakers or anything
Yeah, yeah, yeah
How's your life these days?
What have you been doing?
What are you most passionate about?
What have you been thinking about in your world of health and healing?
I'm working on a newsletter on progesterone for this month
something I've been working on for 50 years
but always something new to think about
Really? Now what could possibly be going on with progesterone
that would warrant that kind of attention in so long?
Talk about that
Partly that the industry is reverting to some of the old myths about it
The estrogen industry, people discover the dangers of estrogen
and that moves interest towards progesterone use
and then the estrogen industry has to defend itself
because it's a multi-billion dollar a year industry
and so they subsidize studies to make people worry about the risks of progesterone
They're starting to say that anything that estrogen is known to cause for 100 years
they're starting to say, well, really progesterone is involved in it
so it's distracting attention from the dangers of estrogen
and in the absence of any real information
they're just putting the thought out there that if estrogen does it
maybe progesterone is really involved somehow
So when we talk about estrogen, are we speaking of the estrogenic foods?
Oh no, just the supplement
Just the supplement, yeah
The industry got started when someone synthesized a very simple chemical
that triggered the whole fertility cycle in mice and rats
In the 30s, someone was thinking about the fact that chimney sweeps got cancer of the scrotum in the 18th century
from getting soot and not bathing
and that led to someone putting soot on rabbits and finding that it was very carcinogenic
but they noticed that besides causing skin cancer, it triggered estrus in the female rabbits
and so they did extracts of soot and found that there were hundreds of estrogenic substances in soot
In the soot, which came from the wood, I guess?
Yeah, you put a piece of cold metal or porcelain or something in the flame of a candle or a Bunsen burner or anything
and carbon spontaneously condenses at high temperature
Methane is a single atom of carbon with hydrogen
and when it burns, like if you have a cloud of natural gas and it explodes
it creates a cloud of soot
which results when the single atom of carbon surrounded by hydrogen condenses spontaneously into very symmetrical six-membered rings
and then ten members on each ring being a hexagon of carbon atoms
Some of the cyclic molecules are huge
and they being very large, heavy, stick to each other and form these gobs of black material
Each molecule has this pattern of six-membered rings which happens to be analogous to the steroid molecule
The steroid molecule has three six-membered rings and one five-membered ring
and when those don't have the proper oxygen atoms added in the right places
they act as estrogen, so you can get a million different estrogenic substances just from soot
Wow, that's fascinating
So the estrogen industry realized that everyone could have a patented unique molecule and sell it as estrogen
which they called the female hormone
because it can be found in the ovary of a pregnant animal
so they advertised that they were selling the female hormone
which they said would make women more fertile
because if it's a female hormone, being fertile is what supposedly characterizes women
and so they convinced even Harvard doctors, two of them did studies giving this basically a soot derivative
diethylstilbestrol to pregnant women claiming that it prevented miscarriage
but the animal studies in the 1930s and early 40s had all demonstrated that every kind of estrogen creates miscarriage or stillbirth
my thesis advisor was one of the early researchers showing that as you increase the dose of estrogen
you can create an abortion or miscarriage at any stage of pregnancy
a tiny dose will prevent implantation, a larger dose will cause miscarriage at the first week, a bigger dose at the second week and so on
so they knew that estrogen caused miscarriages but they were selling it to the public to prevent miscarriage
Wow, just the opposite
simply because they could
Wow, so what's the takeaway, by the way Ray Peat has a PhD in biology from the University of Oregon specialization in physiology
and he's taught at the University of Oregon Urbana College, Montana State University
and been involved in natural medicine for a very long time
I guess could you go back to, I guess your early work was in the late 60s right, with hormones?
Yeah, and my dissertation advisor Arnold Soderwal was the person who did some of these early studies showing that estrogen is a miscarriage
So what's the biggest piece of misinformation to our lady, both ladies and gentlemen, listening around the world about estrogen and progesterone
What is out there that most people believe that you believe is untrue?
Well, lots of doctors still refer to progesterone as the pregnancy hormone
Just a couple of weeks ago someone said her doctor said she had had her uterus removed so she didn't need progesterone because progesterone is only the pregnancy hormone
An absolutely ridiculous idea going back to the 1940s, doctors were taught that to sell estrogen
To get pregnant, to get pregnant
Yeah, and they knew that estrogen causes cancer of the uterus, that was one of the early demonstrations of soot
That as estrogens of all sorts, the first most sensitive organ is the uterus, then the breast, then the brain, then the lungs, then every other tissue
But it's just a matter of sensitivity and the uterus is the most sensitive
And then someone discovered, actually about 1945 it was already discovered that progesterone prevented uterine cancer from estrogen
And so they said if you take estrogen and don't want uterine cancer then you should take progesterone with it
But then the profitable thing was to do a hysterectomy and so hysterectomies were being done
Everyone by the age of 30 or 35 was being urged to have a hysterectomy
And without the uterus then they said there's no need for progesterone
So the woman would have her ovaries and uterus removed and they would refuse to give her progesterone
Because supposedly the uterus was the only organ that needed progesterone being a pregnancy hormone
But in the 1930s the ovaries were found to produce hundreds of times more quantity of progesterone than estrogen
Estrogen is really a minor hormone from the ovary
In experimental surgery people have demonstrated that when they measured the amount of estrogen coming out of the ovary
As a control they measured the blood coming out of the monkey's arm
And found that the arm was producing as much estrogen as the ovary
So the idea of estrogen as an ovarian hormone is really out of context
When every tissue of the animal produces a large amount of estrogen when it's under stress
So laying it out as you have been you can see how there's so much confusion in the medical world and the natural world about these hormones
I thought a lot of that had been settled 30 or 40 years ago
But doctors are still being told if you don't have a uterus you don't need progesterone
When the brain is one of the biggest sources of progesterone
The placenta in pregnancy, the corpus luteum of the ovary
The brain contains 10 times the concentration of progesterone that the blood serum does
And the skin is another major source of progesterone
But when you take out the ovaries you're putting an extra load on the brain and the skin to maintain the concentration of progesterone
So what's the best advice you can give to our ladies around the world right now regarding these two hormones
Whether supplementation or just in general
I know you don't do medical advice to help them to understand what they should or should not be looking at or doing or not doing
Well they're very likely to be told still 60, 70 years after it was proven false
Told that estrogen is a lifelong female hormone
But old men rival women of the same age in the amount of estrogen being produced
Because it's a stress hormone produced by tissue of any sort under stress
So question the claim that aging is evidence of a need for more estrogen
Old tissue increasingly tends to make estrogen
But the opposite is true
Progesterone failure is the primary thing that brings on menopause
The monthly surge of progesterone produces the monthly cycle
It's an outstanding feature of the monthly cycle
When that stops what is left is a surge of estrogen which is no longer balanced by progesterone
But that's the natural way it works for ladies though right?
I mean that's the way it's been set up to do a god thing kind of
When the monthly cycle ends like menopause
Well the stress symptoms increase as menopause approaches
And the healthier the woman is the longer she's able to maintain these monthly surges of progesterone
And with supplementation it's possible to keep menstruating to a much older age
Is that a sign of health in general? The longer a lady menstruates?
I think so
Interesting
And then the hot flashes and all that people have said that that's due to possible toxicity in the ladies body
Can you relate to that?
Stress even in the 20's or younger
I've known women having hot flashes that were resolved when they took thyroid or progesterone
To normalize and prevent the stress
Oh with the thyroid functioning more appropriately they're able to deal with the stress more easily
Yeah and one of the immediate chemical changes that produces the hot flash in the skin
Is a surge of nitric oxide of acetylation
Oh it dilates the blood vessels
Yeah and unopposed estrogen is a powerful activator of nitric oxide
And so I'm convinced that unopposed estrogen is the cause of the hot flashes
And doctors looking only at a blood test of estrogen will say no at menopause
A woman's estrogen in the serum is very low
But this has been very competently studied
If you take a bit of tissue and compare it to the serum
This has been done not only in animals but in women during menopause and in pregnancy and in the cycle
A bit of tissue compared to the serum
The tissue has 10 or 20 times more estrogen than the serum
And what makes the difference what can raise the estrogen in the serum is progesterone
So if you're deficient in progesterone your tissue is likely to have 10 or 20 times more estrogen than shows up in the blood
When you have a normal cycle with progesterone
The progesterone does 8 or 10 different chemical actions causing the tissue content of the estrogen to decrease
And as it decreases in the cell it enters the bloodstream on its way to the kidneys and liver to be excreted
But in the absence of progesterone those changes that release estrogen to be excreted don't happen
And so the estrogen stays inside the cell at a concentration much higher than in the blood
So that's part of the idea you said unopposed estrogen the opposition would be the balance of progesterone
Yeah
And why does that get low?
Does it just living on planet earth with stress and diet and everything why the progesterone levels go too low?
Yeah for pregnancy to be safe for both the mother and the baby
The placenta must produce a huge amount of progesterone everyday
Hundreds of milligrams per day rising all the way through pregnancy to a peak approaching a gram a day
But when the woman or animal is under stress the stress changes the pituitary and all the other glands to avoid pregnancy
A stressed animal of any sort would be less likely to survive if it got pregnant
So the trick is that pregnancy is prevented by stress for the safety of the mother
So it's a natural kind of evolutionary thing
Yeah
And it works the same way with bears or deers or girls
Yeah stress specifically turns off progesterone for the avoidance of pregnancy
Yeah
We've talked to so many ladies over the years they get stressed out of course because they want to get pregnant right?
It's hard you know because they're all worried and concerned about not getting able to get pregnant
Yeah there are lots of stories about a couple that gives up getting pregnant, adopt a kid and immediately she gets pregnant
That's right
The stress is relieved
We have more kids than we need right?
So what's the idea though that many feel like a little bit of progesterone cream just a dab or so helps to keep testosterone levels better for guys?
What's going on there?
And is that a reliable thing to look at for guys listening?
I've heard that from several men over the years
My first experiences experimenting with progesterone was it would stop my whiskers growing for a couple of days
Because a good dose of it blocks, that's one of its functions is to block hormones that could interfere with pregnancy
So progesterone puts everything down the middle when it's high in pregnancy
You don't want any stray hormones disturbing the pregnancy
So that's one of the functions of progesterone is to aim at survival rather than whiskers or production of large amounts of collagen or bone material or anything
So it keeps things right down the middle
So it's not necessarily a testosterone builder or a more anabolic thing, the progesterone cream?
No, it just blocks the stress and if you get it at the right level you don't have enough to block the testosterone, just enough to block the stress and leave your own testosterone
So you're sounding like for the guys don't even mess with it, you wouldn't do it
No, most of the men that I've known who used it, it did shrink the penis and stop whisker growth
It shrinks the penis?
Temporarily
Why?
Because testosterone is maintaining the circulation and the nitric oxide causes acid dilation
That really isn't the mechanism of erection, it's testosterone which gives muscle tone to the veins which empty the penis and the nitric oxide opens the vessels into the penis
So they're doing the same thing in different ways but the right amount of testosterone maintains a certain tone in the exit vessels allowing a considerable amount of blood to stay there even in the passive state
Right, so I'm kind of confused, so this little dab of progesterone that many guys do to keep their testosterone levels up, does it work? I mean is that good? I'm kind of confused, sorry
At just exactly the right amount it can leave the luteinizing hormone active and let the testicle continue producing an adequate amount of testosterone
How would you know what just the right amount is?
I think only by trial and error because I've known men who had anti-testosterone symptoms with 10 mg, others who felt an increase of testosterone with the same small dose
So you'd have to be, I think most of the progesterone, the one I saw from Dr. Wong, they talk about a little, and it's from yams I think, just a little tiny bit, just a dab or so of this cream
Wow that gets a little tricky, you've got to be careful with that, you mess around with that, right?
Dr. Ray Peat is with us, stay right there Dr. Peat, we have lots to talk about this morning, it's an honor to have him on our show on the third Tuesday
If you care to have a question, you can just email Patrick@OneRadioNetwork.com, Patrick@OneRadioNetwork.com
We've been learning quite a bit about hydrogen and some of the cool things that you can do that hydrogen does, you just google molecular hydrogen and a lot of fun things are going on in some of the more mainstream areas of life
With the stroke victims, they're using hydrogen along with oxygen to help the stroke victims to heal
And then we learned from Dr. Thomas Levy that oxidation, he believes, is one of the chief causes of disease
And then, well you can hear the story right here on the promotion of this hydrogen thing, it might be of interest to you
Oops, I pressed the wrong button, sorry, I just pressed the wrong button
I got it now, I got it
Previously with the highly credentialed Dr. Thomas Levy, he argues because the literature shows that oxidation is the cause of disease
But the whole point is the location, the concentration, the duration, the distribution of oxidized biomolecules determines 100% of all diseases
And so that's why I say oxidative stress doesn't cause disease, oxidation is disease
If there's no oxidized biomolecules, you don't have a toxin
The toxic effect is oxidation of biomolecules, that's the entirety of it
And by the grace of God, several months ago, George Wiseman said this about hydrogen
Hydrogen is the world's best antioxidant by a long shot
First of all, it's 700 times smaller than something like CoQ10, 400 times smaller than vitamin C, things like that
So it can literally go, the hydrogen molecule can literally go through everything in your body and go right into the very DNA and repair it
So now it makes sense why George was able to say this back in August 2019, with such conviction
The body accepts that gas and uses it to heal everything
It's like the fountain of youth, it's astonishing the amount of ailments
In fact, in scientific studies, and they have over a thousand scientific studies now
They are showing that it either helps the body heal directly or indirectly from virtually every ailment that ails any water-based life form
Okay, I'm sold, and I was able to get one a couple of months ago, thanks to your support
It's called the Aquacure Hydrogen Machine, breathe the gas and bubble the water
There's a promo code OneRadio for 10% discount, I think a great investment for you
Knowing what we know now, on OneRadioNetwork.com
So, it's pretty cool, I've been really enjoying the hydrogen machine
And I can tell you there are some interesting things going on that I'm just not sure why or something
But things are getting better for me, I'm sleeping better, I'm feeling just more comfortable in my body
Which, you know, for me is just kind of, you know, just something nice going on
I'm feeling some less, the numbness in my little toes after a couple of months on the hydrogen
Of course, I do some other things, so I can't honestly say for sure, you know, that's what it is
But we like it, we think there's a lot of science behind it, there is a lot of science behind it
We don't think we know, I saw one article that hydrogen was being used as medicine
Back in 1888, the Annals of Surgery recorded one of the very first publications that linked hydrogen to medicine
It referred to Dr. Nicholas Senn, who at the time was using hydrogen for intestinal applications
And they have all the things here that you can look and check it out and see if what they just said is just made up or what
So, it's interesting, I think there's something here for you
There's a lifetime warranty and then a one year money back warranty if you don't like it
And you just get it back
OK, I've got to do one thing, something just locked up on me quickly
But not to worry, I know how to do it
I've got a little thing that does that, and I think that's going to work
And, sorry, I think we're just 60 seconds away from Dr. Ray Peat
Previously with Daniel Vitalis, we were talking about pine pollen
Pollen is essentially the equivalent of what an animal would have as sperm
Pollen is like the male part, the semen, and it fertilizes the ovum of the flower which becomes eventually a fruit
And so if we were going to draw the equivalent, it would be like that the flower is like the female sex organ
And the pollen is like the male sexual ejaculate
Well, pine trees, which sort of just dominate so much of the landscape of North America and so much of the world
Pine trees, their semen, they dust the landscape in pollen
And that pollen, being the sort of male part of the plant, has some correspondences to male physiology in our species and many other animal species
So what I'm saying is pine pollen contains all of these different anabolic androgenic hormones
Plant versions of hormones that we need like testosterone, like DHEA
Well, the birds and the bees and the flowers and the trees
Good stuff, guys, and for you girls, too
Several choices of pine pollen, any Sir Thrival link, oneradionetwork.com
Pine pollen is on sale for three days, we have Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday
Big sale, pine pollen, any of the Sir Thrival links on oneradionetwork.com
It's the third Tuesday of the month and Dr. Ray Peat, thank you so much, Doc, for coming on once a month
I'm getting emails from around the world
You've got a lot of fans
How did all these people find you over the years? I'm real curious
I mean, you have a pretty standard kind of basic website and you're out there to promote
People just found you?
Yeah, it's interesting, in the 70s when I started giving out samples of thyroid and progesterone dissolved in vitamin E
People got such tremendous results, just giving it away to whoever happened by
They started talking about the amazing things that happened with progesterone and thyroid
And it has just spread
So long ago you were actually giving out little samples of progesterone and vitamin E and also the thyroid, the piggy thyroid in the vitamin E
And people were just...
Yeah, I bought a small barrel of armor thyroid powder
And at that time it was popular to use powdered kelp as a dietary supplement
And so I would put a little bit of armor thyroid powder in with the powdered kelp and tell them it was a weak form of natural thyroid
And they were acquainted with the idea of using kelp as a supplement
But the thyroid was really the active component
Interesting, so what kind of experiences were...
And how much were you giving this little dose of the progesterone and the vitamin E?
What kind of experience were the guys having and the women too, were having different good experiences?
Oh, yeah, one suicidal young woman, 21 or 22 years old, every two weeks she became absolutely suicidal
And her husband had to hire a babysitter to keep her from killing herself
And finally committed her to the local psychiatric ward
But because it was cyclic, she was in for a week and was perfectly sane the week she was in
But as soon as she got out, she tried to turn on the gas and kill herself
So her husband brought her over and she was sobbing as he brought her in
And I gave her a bottle of progesterone in oil and told her to go in the bathroom and spread it all over her body
And she came out and within five minutes had stopped sobbing
And the bulging veins on her hand disappeared as the next phase
Forty minutes after putting it on, she was smiling
And exactly 45 minutes after putting the oil on, she said, "It's like night turning into day, I wish I could always feel this good"
And two weeks later, the same thing happened
She went into a suicidal state and I had given her progesterone dissolved in vegetable oil
And it hadn't stayed in solution, so she had oiled herself but wasn't getting the dissolved progesterone
So she was suicidal again, but when I gave her some of the actual dissolved material
Exactly the same cycle, the sobbing stopped, the veins disappeared, the smile
And at 45 minutes, exactly the same sort of from black to white mood change
Interesting, and the guys in general, what kind of feedback did you get from them?
And how much progesterone were you giving in that little dose?
Two or three men rubbed it on their scalp every day and got fuzz to grow
In about four or five weeks, they were getting probably 20 milligrams a day on their head
Was that affecting raising testosterone levels to cause the hair to grow?
It was one of them that mentioned the shrinkage
After all these years with progesterone for men, you have a kind of a gram or a milligram standard that you would kind of start guys at if they wanted to experiment with it?
Five milligrams
Five milligrams, I guess you could, I don't know how you'd measure that, but somehow, well interesting
Dr. Ray Peat is with us, we have a lot of good emails, patrick@oneradionetwork.com
Here's an email for you Dr. Peat, here's a gentleman that says you recommend 2000 milligrams calcium per day
A concern expressed by other nutritionists is that calcium may not go to the bones, but into the soft tissue and other places causing systemic damage over time
If one does take your suggestion, what are the prerequisite actions or physiological cell metabolism assumptions you are making for taking 2000 milligrams?
And what kind of calcium?
I know there are still lots of doctors and nutritionists who have that idea, but the parathyroid gland is constantly regulating, responding to conditions
And if you eat an excess of calcium and a moderate or low amount of phosphate, the parathyroid gland becomes very passive, especially if you have adequate vitamin D
And the parathyroid gland, its main function seems to be to take calcium out of the bone and bring it into the blood
But a side effect of taking it out of the bone is that it activates take up by the soft tissue and keeping the parathyroid gland as inhibited as possible
And that leaves your bones unaltered, the calcium can still go in, but the parathyroid isn't going to be bringing it out of the bones into the bloodstream where it can affect the blood vessels
And when you eat an excess of calcium and have an adequate vitamin D level in your body, the calcium passes right through your kidneys into the urine
But if your parathyroid is active, it can form stones on the way out, the blood ability to keep it in solution changes
And it's that same change that causes it to go into the blood vessel wall
Carbon dioxide is the factor that keeps the calcium in solution in the bloodstream and stable in the bones
Calcium carbonate is the first molecule deposited in the bone and it's gradually changed to calcium phosphate
But carbon dioxide is responsible for putting it into the bone
When the parathyroid hormone is active, it forms lactic acid in the bone and it's lactic acid that dissolves, removes the calcium from the bone
So the balance of carbon dioxide versus lactic acid is under the control of parathyroid hormone in the bone
And that same process happening in the blood vessels, the carbon dioxide keeps the calcium dissolved, ionized in solution
But the lactic acid, if it is allowed to form either in the blood or blood vessels, that counteracts the carbon dioxide, precipitates calcium and forms hardening of the arteries and kidney stones and so on
So keeping the parathyroid hormone low and your carbon dioxide production high relative to lactic acid is what's going to keep bones strong and arteries soft
That's why Dr. Cowan, the fellow on the heart, he's a proponent of keeping the lactic acid levels low, so that's probably why, because he knows it happens or it's tied in with the calcium deposits potentially in the arteries
Yeah, and prolactin and cortisol and parathyroid hormone all tend to interfere with carbon dioxide production
Progesterone and thyroid are the things that most support the production of carbon dioxide and suppress the formation of lactic acid
Suppress it. Yeah, this ties right in. Jerome says that I have some history of my grandfather and father having a stroke, one in the brain and one around his heart
Can Dr. Peat give me some ideas, some things I can do or not do to strengthen my arteries and veins so they don't have a problem later in life?
Good question. So is that what a stroke is? Is it a stroke where the veins will just actually...
No, there are two main kinds of stroke. One in which a clot forms and plugs up the small arteries and the other where a blood vessel breaks and leaks blood, it can form a giant clot outside of the blood vessel, so it's a bleeding stroke or a clotted stroke
There's two different kinds. Let's first talk about...
And then there's another relatively harmless thing which is a transient ischemic attack. That's where the arteries or capillaries close down because carbon dioxide isn't being produced
So that's what they call these mini strokes, Doc?
Yeah
So the ischemic kind of things, they're not good but they're not life-threatening
And so before we get to the clot, let's talk about the carbon dioxide. We over-breathe, that releases carbon dioxide?
Yeah
Breathing fast?
You lose carbon dioxide when you breathe too hard
Too hard
And a low thyroid person is producing very little CO2 and so it takes very little over-breathing for a hypothyroid person to experience that constriction of blood vessels from loss of CO2
Interesting. So that's another reason to keep that thyroid happy and in good shape so you can retain more CO2
Yeah, it's low thyroid people who suffer high altitude sickness because to get more oxygen in thin air, they over-breathe
Is clotting, going back to Jerome's question, on clotting on the potential strokes, is that the number one cause?
Yeah, in the United States at least, that's by far the most common type of stroke other than the transient ischemic
And why do these little clots form, do we know?
It isn't quite a deficiency of aspirin but it's related to that. A serotonin excess, serotonin increases when you're under stress, especially if you're hypothyroid
And hyperventilation raises the pH of your blood by blowing out the CO2, carbonic acid should be keeping the pH of your blood towards the lower end of the range
And as the pH of the blood rises from hyperventilation, your platelets lose the ability to bind serotonin
And so serotonin rises in the blood when you hyperventilate, but serotonin in the brain stimulates respiration and makes you breathe harder
And the doctrine for about 30 years has been claiming that serotonin produced in your intestine and carried in your bloodstream can't get into the brain to affect the respiration
But in fact, very clear experiments have shown that the blood-brain barrier as far as serotonin is concerned really doesn't exist because serotonin breaks down the barrier
So when it's high in the blood, it gets in your brain, makes you breathe harder and if you're low in carbon dioxide to start with, it increases the release of serotonin into your bloodstream in a vicious circle
And that could cause then the platelets to do their thing and clots
Yeah, and that's how an emotional stress, something that just makes you breathe faster
If you're hypothyroid, it will start the cycle in which the pH rises, the serotonin is released from platelets, activates your brain to breathe harder, exacerbating the problem
Fascinating. So can you conjecture then that just angst and tension and planet earth and worry could be a really chief cause for these strokes that people have?
Yeah, on the background of a low thyroid function
On the background of a low thyroid function. Because if Mr. Thyroid is happy and you have a TSH, I mean way down, 0, 1 or 2 or something, and your body temperature is up, the body is not affected by stress as badly?
Yeah, because your progesterone and DHEA and pregnenolone are being produced generously by the well-circulated blood supply carrying sugar to all these tissues
Hypoglycemia is something that works with low carbon dioxide in the blood. They both tend to increase lactic acid, which wastes sugar and makes the problem worse
So low blood sugar actually creates lactic acid, but I mean, we were taught that sugar is more acid and creates lactic acid
Only if you're under stress and can't oxidize it. Thyroid and progesterone increase your ability to oxidize glucose into carbon dioxide and the carbon dioxide by regulating the pH turns off lactic acid production
So it increases efficiency to increase your metabolic rate
On the thyroid, how powerful of a metric is the body temperature in your opinion, Dr. Rapey, for thyroid function?
It's almost the ruling factor. If you cool your body to 95 or 96 degrees Fahrenheit, it's essentially impossible to metabolize properly
You don't always metabolize rationally if your temperature is at 100 degrees, but it's a lot easier to get full oxidation all the way to carbon dioxide when your body temperature is up
So the fever production is a curative thing. In a way, it's equivalent to giving a good supplement of thyroid, progesterone, sugar, and calcium and so on
We had talked to a doc a few months, maybe a month ago, who was suggesting if you get one of these little infrared thermometers, you ever see those? And you can, you know, about a foot away from your surface and you can tell your surface temperature there
And he said if you did it on your big toe, if you're about 90 degrees, that's another indication that your thyroid is happy. Have you ever heard of that? Do you think that could be valid?
Well, adrenaline is protective. When your thyroid is low, you increase adrenaline and serotonin
And a primary function of adrenaline is to keep the blood flowing to your brain and lungs and heart and it will make your hands and feet get very, very cold
And a person can still be functioning very well adapting to the low thyroid by keeping their brain and lungs and heart hot and well supplied with whatever sugar and oxygen are available
So the adrenaline takes the blood out of the extremities to keep things working in the core
Which is the cold hands and feet, right? That's the cold hands and feet
Yeah, and when you shake hands with a person on a warm day, if they have cold hands, they're very likely hypothyroid unless you're scaring them
So a 90 degree toe with this thing could be a reasonable metric?
Yeah, if the room is warm, your hands and feet should be reasonably warm
And when they're very cold, it means either that you're being frightened into high adrenaline or that your thyroid isn't adequate to keep the heat up in the extremities
Here's another question on thyroid. We always get a lot. A question for Dr. Peat.
What is the mechanism for how proper thyroid function and stomach acid break down or neutralize oxalates in the diet?
Does it matter how much oxalic acid is consumed? Also, how effective are mineral compounds like magnesium or potassium citrate at preventing the negative effects of oxalic acid?
Do you understand the question?
If you're eating enough minerals, the calcium oxalate is likely to precipitate in your stomach and intestine and not even be absorbed
So I think the calcium and magnesium content of your food is protective by keeping it out of your system, keeping the oxalate out of your bloodstream
Here's an email. I've been having trouble finding good thyroid supplement. Is there anything else to help me with my hypothyroidism?
I'm avoiding polyunsaturated fats and don't eat an excess of uncooked cabbage or kale or other vegetables of that family. When they're raw especially, they can be very antithyroid
Somebody was asking about putting a red light on your thyroid. What does Dr. Peat think about that to raise thyroid levels?
It does have an action but what it's doing mostly is opening blood vessels and that in itself can increase the production of thyroid but it affects the respiration of cells, can increase efficiency locally
I've got an experience I just wanted to share with you, Doc. I've been putting black cumin seed oil on my thyroid and a little DMSO and going to sauna, you know, and let it get hot and the infrared lights and also using the red light and tapping a little bit and just kind of talking to it and being, saying, "Mr. Thyroid, get happier"
My body temperature has gone up really in the last month probably about a half a degree.
What kind of oil?
Black cumin seed oil. So I'm kind of thinking maybe there is some toxicity going on and that helped to get that out. I don't know why the black cumin seed oil being heated up would do that.
I think it is able to catalyze oxidative metabolism.
Oh, it's an antioxidant.
From the shape of the molecule, it looks like it would be a pro-oxidative, pro-thyroid factor.
But I've also been breathing the hydrogen in the water too so that could be helping. Very interesting.
So that might be something fun for you all to play with. I don't know. I can't give medical advice but put some black cumin seed on your thyroid and put a little heating blanket on or something or a red light.
It couldn't hurt though, I don't think.
Here's a 68-year-old man on Natrithroid with healthy weight and have tried many diets, no processed foods and exercise but still cannot cure type 2 diabetes.
Don't want insulin or metformin. What would your experience suggest I try next? This is from Jim in Eugene, Oregon.
Getting a perfect, well-balanced diet is the first thing. Adequate calcium, a fairly high ratio of calcium to phosphate in your diet.
Not too much meat or beans or nuts because of the high phosphate content in those relative to calcium.
There are two main classes of food that provide a very high calcium-magnesium content and low phosphate. Milk and cheese are one and cooked greens is the other category.
Vitamin D should be in the middle of the range, 50 or 60 nanograms per milliliter.
Beyond that, you want to make sure that your thyroid is good and the pH of the blood and the CO2 level are indicators of that.
I don't think blood tests are the most reliable way to measure your CO2. A breath analyzer is really good.
Actually using carbon dioxide supplements, absorbing it through your skin or taking little bits of baking soda in water,
that will actually suppress the lactic acid production if you do it in a graded amount like half a teaspoon in a half a glass of water a few times a day.
That will slightly increase the amount of carbon dioxide in your blood which will increase the CO2 inside cells,
adjusting the pH and suppressing the lactic acid production and shifting the cell to be able to oxidize the sugar.
Diabetics, they talk about the sugar not being able to get into the cell but it goes into the cell and it's turned to lactic acid is the problem.
Oh, so that insulin resistance thing you talked about, Dr. Peat, you're saying that it's not the whole story.
They got it wrong somewhere.
Stress increases the liberation of free fatty acids from your tissues.
So apart from the amount of fat you're eating, it's the liberation of free fatty acids which get into the cell and shift,
block the ability of the cell to oxidize glucose and when glucose isn't being oxidized, it's likely to be turned into lactic acid.
And the lactic acid shifts the pH and starts the whole process.
Here is James. He's listening on Facebook. Can you please ask Dr. Peat some of the best ways to improve the health of my liver?
A good diet is the first thing. B vitamins are extremely important for getting things running.
Selenium is essential for being able to use the thyroid molecules to put it into the right active T3 form and carbohydrate is very important.
But then you want to periodically check, have a blood test to see if your vitamin D and thyroid hormone is in the right range.
From Adrian, Dr. Peat talks about taking some good forms of sugar.
Does he believe that the A1C blood test, which I think, and I'm just adding this point, isn't that over 90 days or something,
is a reliable metric to see if I'm taking too much sugar?
No, I don't think it relates very closely to sugar because it will be influenced by breakdown of free fatty acids.
The polyunsaturated fats break down into fragments that look like sugar fragments, but the fats are much more oxidizable and toxic.
The proof is it's easier to oxidize those guys.
Yeah.
Yeah, and so doing proof is actually raise your A1C.
Yeah, as they break down.
But doing organic beet sugar or honey or maple syrup, that doesn't raise your A1C or if it does, do you care?
Yeah, the numbers have been exaggerated so that the lower than, I think, seven, they found that the sickest people weren't at the highest level.
So the numbers were cooked a bit for whatever reason.
It's a lot more complicated than just sugar causing that to rise.
It generally is with you, Dr. Peat. That's why we like you.
Here's an email from Trent.
I donate blood several times per year.
What, in your opinion, is the optimal serum ferritin blood level for someone age 70?
I don't think ferritin is meaningful enough to worry about.
Don't even worry about it?
Watching your hemoglobin level, at the low end of the normal range of hemoglobin, I think it's the safest place to be.
Say that again, please.
The low end of the normal range for hemoglobin.
Okay.
Hemoglobin is the essential thing for delivering oxygen.
And ferritin can go up and down according to inflammation.
Keeping it in a moderate range usually means that you're not very sick because sickness and inflammation will distort it greatly.
What is the idea that we hear...
Oh, excuse me. Did I interrupt you?
The saturation of transferrin, the percentage saturation, should be under 30, a little under 30.
Under 30.
So what is this idea of giving blood every so often to get rid of excess?
Is it iron that people do this?
That was the traditional idea that it would prevent the accumulation on a standard Western diet.
Men constantly during their lifetime tend to accumulate iron.
Women after menopause start accumulating it at the same rate because they aren't losing it.
And so blood donors were seen to maintain an adequate level without so much accumulation with aging.
But in the last several years, people are saying that there are other things.
One label for them was stressins, units created by stress.
There are several different names for substances released into the bloodstream during stress and aging.
And getting rid of those has a slightly rejuvenating effect.
Interesting. This is from Elmer.
Please ask Dr. Peat the difference between taking something like Pogest-E and pregnenolone powder.
And also if I'm trying to lose fat, should we be drinking lower fat milk?
Yeah. I think milk is such an easy nutrient to get almost all of your nutrients
that drinking two or three quarts a day is good for most people.
But you don't want to drink that much whole milk if you aren't doing very hard labor to burn calories.
So 1% is an average amount of fat for a person of average activity.
Totally anecdotal, Dr. Peat, but after starting to drink milk and more and more of it after talking to you over the past few months,
raw milk that I'm just warming up a little bit, a little bit of sugar in there, beet sugar,
I've gained about, well I'm starting to lift weights, but I've gained about three pounds already.
And that's pretty unusual, that's very unusual for me.
I haven't been able to gain weight pretty much my whole life.
So that's interesting, interesting information.
But it's whole milk, you know, grass-fed whole milk.
Yeah, milk contains small amounts of progesterone and thyroid.
In the Three Mile Island nuclear accident, lots of people, lots of babies were born without thyroid glands.
But those who were breastfed, as long as they were being breastfed,
the doctors didn't notice that they had no thyroid gland function.
As soon as they were weaned, the absence of thyroid showed up,
showing that the breast milk was keeping an adequate amount of thyroid to keep them growing.
But cow's milk isn't as rich in thyroid and progesterone.
But you get a little bit though, you get a little bit.
Yeah, that small amount adds to the effect of the calcium to stimulate your metabolic rate slightly.
Do we know, or is there any research to show if there's a big difference between grass-fed milk and regular old milk,
even if it's organic? Who knows what they're feeding them, organic feed?
Do we know?
Yeah, food can be organic and still not be ideal.
Sure, of course.
There can be stinky weeds in the pasture that make it taste bad.
But grass-fed milk has more vitamin E, according to the research.
But not necessarily, we don't know more hormones or progesterone or anything like that.
We don't know that. We haven't seen anything there.
I don't think anyone has tested that.
Good idea, that'd be great.
Thanks for having Dr. Peat on as a regular guest.
From Chris, before I ask my question, could you please convey my sincere gratitude for Dr. Peat for helping me deal with a heart issue.
This helps me to get out of the clutches of the medical world.
Here's my question.
Why do feet swell up especially when it is warm?
The swelling reduces later in the day, and when it is cooler, it does not completely go away.
I'm on two grains of natural thyroid and following Dr. Peat's dietary considerations such as avoiding polys, poofas, drinking some milk and orange juice.
Thank you.
A little sweet, Peat's swelling but it seems to, when it's warmer.
I've heard that from quite a few people, but I don't really understand how it works.
I think it's partly the shift of the nervous system.
You let down your adrenaline a little bit when it's warmer because adrenaline's function is to keep the blood up in your vital organs.
And when it's warmer, you can reduce the adrenaline and that relaxes blood vessels and lets any leakiness show up.
But I think it means that you're maybe not producing enough albumin in your liver or having some other effect of an unbalanced estrogen level.
Estrogen makes blood vessels leaky and reduces the formation of albumin in the liver.
And albumin, working with sodium, is what keeps the blood, keeps the fluid in the bloodstream rather than leaking out into your feet.
So the cold feet then, it's tied with the thyroid low, but then it's the adrenaline combination that's not getting the blood there to the extremities.
Is that right?
Yeah.
Adrenaline keeps things working, but it changes the way they work.
Speaking of estrogen, it just came to me.
Are these what birth control pills are?
I don't know if they're very popular as they used to be, but are these estrogen manipulators for the ladies?
Are they dangerous?
Yeah. In the '30s, they already knew that estrogen prevented implantation or caused miscarriages.
They didn't want to sell a miscarriage pill.
And all through the 1940s and '50s, the drug companies realized that it would be a very profitable product to sell a birth control pill, but they didn't have the ideology that they knew it killed the embryo.
And they didn't want to have the drug company identified as baby killers.
But in the '50s, someone thought up the idea that it isn't acting on the uterus, it's acting only on your brain and pituitary, and it's going to stop ovulation.
If you can stop ovulation, you won't be accused of causing abortions.
But that was fake news.
I think so, yeah.
There was no evidence.
How can you see when a woman ovulates an ovum?
In an animal, you can dissect them and watch the process and catch the actual ovum.
Yeah.
But in humans, it was simply declared rather than observed.
In general, do you know this?
I know you may not know this, but are these birth control pills still very popular in our culture?
People use them a lot?
Yeah, the first wave of them was causing sometimes fatal hemorrhages, often disabling strokes by causing clotting in the brain.
So they reduced the amount of estrogen by about a factor of 10 from the first wave of contraceptives and made them more saleable because so many women were having strokes or hemorrhages.
But still, the medical literature is heavily biased against recognizing any damage done by them.
But still, the literature is out there showing that depression, various mood changes, movement disorders, restlessness, lots of problems are still associated with them.
Yeah.
Dr. Peat, stay right there.
Patrick, Tim, Pony, we'll do a quick little break here, and then we'll get into our last segment with Dr. Ray Peat on Radionetwork.com.
Please like these things on Facebook, there are videos now, and on YouTube, subscribe, and all these things help to kind of spread the word.
And we appreciate that if you would do that, that would be totally cool.
Kathy writes on Facebook today that forgot to mention, oh she wrote two of them, but she said, Kathy says here, forgot to mention that sulfur was one of the first things that helped me to bring my health back and started me having, started me healing.
Oh, that's very nice of you, Kathy.
Kathy, if you'd like to try our sulfur, we have a great product, just go on our website, two pounds of sulfur for a particular price, and then another price for Canada, another price for worldwide.
If you want more than four pounds, email me, Patrick@1radionetwork.com, and we'll take care of you.
Previously, Dr. Hal Huggins on detoxing mercury.
You do not have to get all the mercury out of the body, that's not what the problem is.
It's the direction it's going.
If you have more going out than you have coming in, then you're going to have a good chemistry, you're going to feel good.
But if you have more going in to the body than going out, chemistries look bad and you feel bad.
If you had to name just a few things on the top of your list to help get mercury out, whether they be supplements or foods, give us your top five.
Okay.
Off the top of your head.
The best thing would be the infrared sauna.
The thing is, detoxification is easy.
Anybody can release a lot of mercury, but if you're using a sauna or especially the infrared sauna, then you are eliminating the mercury through the skin and you are bypassing liver and kidney.
So that's a very good way to go.
It certainly is, Dr. Huggins. We love Dr. Huggins. I'm sure he's doing well wherever he is.
If you'd like to get one, just email me. These are great units, folks.
You can see how they look here. There's no plugs, there's no wiring, there's no plumbing.
Well, you just plug it in.
There's two far infrared units at the front of this unit, if you look at the front, right at the first two.
And you can do just one of those if you don't want it as hot.
And this baby will get up there maybe 160, 170 degrees, and believe me, you'll sweat.
And as I said, you know, I talked about Dr. Peat and the black cumin seed oil and my body temperature going up on my thyroid.
I put it all over my thyroid with a little DMSO, and then you just kind of scoot down in the chair, as you can see the lady there, and then your thyroid is, you know, covered.
So you can use it, and you can do the black cumin seed oil, you can do it on your tummy or a little bit of turpentine, pure pine gum spirits on your tummy with DMSO.
Well, you probably don't need it.
So there's a lot of cool things you can do with this.
Also put turpentine or castor oil on the bottom of your feet, and that'll soak in there with a nice hot.
So they're fun, and we'll get you one for $9.95, $9.95 delivered, continental US.
And if you'd like to get one and you live around the world, just simply email me and we'll hook you up for a pretty good price.
Now's the time to get them, $9.95, have it for the holidays.
Just email me, patrick@oneradionetwork.com.
We love this product that you're seeing the picture of.
It's called Pearlseum.
Now, Chinese medicine and, or even medicine have used for hundreds, well, thousands of years have used pearl for beauty, for longevity.
You can use pearl on your face with a face cream.
You can brush your teeth with it, which is amazing.
And this, you can also take it internally.
It's proven by science to really work.
It has, it's made, it's real live pearl, which I believe is calcium carbonate.
I think that's what it is.
And Dr. Peat, while he wasn't endorsing this product, he said the calcium carbonate was a good way to take calcium.
So we thought so, and of course it wouldn't be around for thousands of years if the pearl, you know, if the calcium was ending up in your arteries.
You know, it just doesn't do it with this product.
I would get two containers, two little green containers, and then put one in your bathroom, one where your supplements are.
Brush your teeth with it.
You can take a little bit before bed.
It helps you to sleep.
It's a very nice product.
Pearlseum, real pearl.
That's all there is in there, nothing else.
Real pearl from OneRadioNetwork.com.
We talk about your health, wealth, and well-being on OneRadioNetwork.com.
Dr. Ray Peat has a website, and you can check it out.
It's RayPeat.com, and we always put a link on his show page, and you can click on there and support Dr. Peat's work by getting his newsletter, which comes out, Dr. Peat, what, every couple months, right?
Every two months.
Two months, yeah.
What's your latest one about?
Progesterone.
Oh, progesterone, of course.
It'll be out in about two weeks.
And you look at your bio.
I mean, you were looking at this, what, 50 years ago?
Yeah.
Wow.
I'm putting in a little bit of the history, but bringing it up to date, putting in some of the recent carbonic acid, carbon dioxide connections.
Yeah, yeah.
Here's an email.
What's the percentage, or what percent of tryptophan ingested from food is converted to serotonin?
That depends on your level of stress and other things, but it can be very high when you're under stress.
Other times, very little of it.
This is an interesting question.
Is risk-taking in life conducive or not to the state of learned helplessness?
Is risk-taking involved in being in the state of learned helplessness?
Do you talk about learned helplessness?
Oh, quite a bit, yeah.
Serotonin turns on the stress system, but it can also turn off the adaptive things, such as production of progesterone.
And you can break out of learned helplessness by increasing your energy.
Thyroid is a crucial thing in stopping learned helplessness.
And what exactly is learned helplessness?
The term relates to the old studies in which they convinced a rat that escape was impossible.
But the animal in that state would allow itself to drown very easily because it saw no use in swimming.
Its heart would simply stop after maybe just a few minutes of resisting.
But if they put the animal in the tortured situation that caused it to become helpless,
if they then showed it some exit possibility, it in effect vaccinated it against stress.
So that when dropped into the water, instead of drowning in a few minutes, sometimes they would resist and swim for more than a day.
Interesting.
Simply a mental change, something they learned.
That's why it wasn't called a physical thing. It was a learned helplessness.
I see.
Somebody wants to know, is that Mexi-Coke that you two were talking about, does it have cocaine in it?
Which thing?
Mexi-Coke.
Oh, I think all Coke is made from an extract of the coca leaf.
But around 1940, we're told to remove the cocaine.
And so there are molecules closely related to cocaine that I think are beneficial.
Some of the same benefits that the coca leaf cures have for endurance and anti-inflammatory and such.
But according to the official analysis, the real cocaine has been removed.
Would you ask Dr. Peate to talk about free will and determinism?
That might take a while.
Well, if you're into it, we are. We have no place to go. It's up to you, sir.
I think we, life in general, things in general, I think we are determined to have free will.
It's part of our nature, part of the nature of every living thing.
And like I mentioned, the formation of soot molecules, extremely complex, organized, symmetrical molecules,
form spontaneously when methane explodes.
You get some carbon dioxide, oxygen consumes the hydrogens, but the carbon atoms have an intrinsic ordering principle.
They spontaneously organize into these very, very big, complex molecules.
I think that spontaneous tendency to improve things, create order out of chaos,
I think that's where determinism affects free will so that the situation,
the carbon atoms didn't have a written plan for what they were going to do, but it was in their nature,
given the opportunity to create high orders of organization.
I think our inherent free will is intending to create high-level order.
As we press forward, moving in our life, our free will is what's creating order and more peace and love.
Yeah, in other words, I think we're biased against the creation of chaos and inclined towards the creation of order.
Yeah, I like that. That's great. Good for you.
As women get older, Ellen wants to know, what are signs of low progesterone?
As women get older, what are signs of low progesterone?
Just about everything.
Aging. It's so at the center of life and stability.
For example, weakening bones, loss of elasticity in the skin, loss of moisture and oil production in the skin,
stiffening of joints and arteries, a change of reduced curiosity and initiative,
less interest in adventure, more interest in security.
Everything from mental processes down to the smallest.
Is this for both male and female in general?
Yeah.
I've been listening to several of your shows and you have a Dr. Peat. I think they're just great.
Thank you so much for having come on.
Well, it's our pleasure.
Here's a question. Recently, I've seen new cookware in department stores, titanium ceramic nonstick.
Does Dr. Peat think this would be safe to use? Titanium ceramic nonstick?
Without seeing any tests of it, I would refrain from using it to cook anything acidic
because ceramics, unless they're specially designed to resist acid and corrosion,
you wouldn't want to cook a tomato sauce on it, for example, in case it might release titanium into your food.
Generally, though, we've heard that pure ceramic like La Cruze, that expensive stuff, is good cookware.
Is that your opinion as well? Pure ceramic or not?
Did I just hear you say not with spaghetti sauce?
Ceramics, remember, lead-based ceramics were a major problem.
Ceramics aren't necessarily acid resistant. It takes some special chemistry to...
The more it's like a simple silicon glass surface, the safer it is.
So glass is really... I don't know if they even make it anymore. I think it's a vision cookware.
You can find them online. I got a whole set on eBay, but I think that's probably some of the best, right? Glass?
Oh, sure. That's what I've been using for years.
Like I say, folks, they don't sell it anymore. It's called vision cookware,
but you can go on eBay and buy a whole set for pretty inexpensive.
I don't know. People just stocked them up when they knew they were going out of style or something.
Here's... This is a good one. Oral micronized progesterone, is it equal to progest-E in its effect?
That's what the drug companies are now... For several years now, they've been selling progesterone.
It's usually in an emulsion or just a paste of peanut oil and micronized progesterone.
And so the progesterone is mostly in a crystalline, though micronized, form.
And a lot of that, as your bile emulsifies the peanut oil,
very little of the progesterone goes in the solution because peanut oil isn't a great solvent.
Like the girl I mentioned that had no effect from the vegetable oil dissolved progesterone
because it had crystallized out in a period of two weeks.
Some of it, as it contacts the micronized crystals contacting your intestine surface,
will be taken up, molecules released from the crystals will go directly from your intestine to the liver
and will then be attached to a sugar-like molecule, glucuronic acid,
which then circulates through the body but quickly leaves at the urine.
That causes the progesterone to have a very different effect from the natural form that circulates in the fats.
And so when it's dissolved in vitamin E, vitamin E, as it's emulsified by the bile,
breaks up and enters the form of chylomitrons, which enter the body in a very different pathway,
going through the wall of the intestine into the lymphatic vessels,
which then the chylomitrons dump into your general circulation, bypassing the liver.
And the chylomitrons, we normally process our fats through this system
and this lets the progesterone distribute through the whole system,
getting equilibrated under red blood cells, under the cholesterol-carrying proteins and other cells
so that it can pass endlessly through the liver in these forms.
The red blood cells can keep it in circulation for more than a day after one dose.
It goes into the red blood cells from the chylomitrons, for example,
to be at a higher concentration inside the cells and in the serum,
where the micronized progesterone, as far as it hits the intestine wall,
is going straight to the liver to be glucuronidated and excreted.
How do you remember all this stuff?
Oh, just...
Is it right you're 83 revolutions around the sun? You're 83?
Yeah.
Wow. Man, whatever you're doing, sir, you're doing something good. You remember all that stuff.
It's seeing the pattern.
Yeah.
The way a cat learns, for example, they can keep a cat in a cage for a long time,
but once it sees how the lock works, if it's some sort of a latch,
once it sees the way out of the cage, it never forgets.
That's great.
But if you teach it something by rote, it'll forget it the next day.
So you get it at a deep level of who you are because of your passion,
and it's like it's there for you. It's not like you have to remember a phone number or something.
Yeah, it's seeing how things work.
Yeah, fascinating. James is on Facebook. He says,
"I don't have set meal times, and I just kind of follow my hunger signals.
Is this negatively affecting my circadian rhythms? Is there anything else I should care about?"
Just eating when you're hungry?
I don't really think so. I think it's okay to eat whenever you feel like it.
The experiments on mice claim that it's good to go a long time to fast for a while,
but a lot of things are involved.
Mice are nocturnal animals. They normally eat at night,
and just changing their schedule creates such stresses that it's hard to extrapolate from rodents to people,
especially things like eating.
Yeah. Ellie says, "I'm fascinated with the conversation about milk.
I've never really thought about drinking milk, and I was just wonderingI'm kind of an extreme girl
could you really just live on good milk? I mean, could you live?"
Could you? I guess you could.
Yeah, people have created a milk diet of 30 to 60 days on just milk,
but you get iron deficient if you try to live on it,
because the pregnant woman's high estrogen causes her to absorb a very large amount of calcium and iron,
and so the baby comes out very highly charged with iron,
and to overcome that load of iron, it has to have a diet essentially free of iron for up to a year
so that it grows into the large amount of iron that it has stored in its liver and bones.
Interesting. So it's all set up so when they're just nursing with nothing else, it's got everything.
So later on, though, you don't have the iron. Yeah, that's fascinating.
How would you supplement the iron if you wanted to do milk for a long time?
Eggs are a very good source.
Ray Peat mentioned on the last show, wearing a sleeping hat.
Does it matter what it's made out of?
Not at all, as long as it's comfortable and warm.
And so what's going on at night? I like to wear these little socks, you know, and put some oil on the winter,
like sesame seed oil, and then put these little socks on. That's kind of fun.
Yeah, when tissues get below, I think it's about 90 degrees,
your hands and feet easily can get down to that temperature.
The cells start producing, the white blood cells passing through those cold areas
will start producing inflammatory signals, which they carry up to the rest of your body.
And so cold feet really can affect your brain.
Yeah, maybe that's why Aria Bettis talked about doing the sesame oil, you know, at night and putting these little socks on.
And it's kind of fun, especially in the winter when it's so dry. It's a very nice thing.
So you all might try that.
Ian writes in, "I would like to ask Dr. Peat's opinion on the cause of vertigo
and what he would do to combat it, vertigo."
A very common cause is toxic bacterial growth in the intestine,
causing a surge of serotonin, leading to a balance that shifts water into your vestibular apparatus that governs your balance.
That's probably 90% of the cases of vertigo.
But there are other types that involve serotonin, dopamine, and histamine imbalance farther down in your brain,
not just in the balance apparatus itself, but in the brainstem,
the reticular apparatus that feeds the information to your balance system.
Maybe 1 or 2% of the vertigo people are having a chemical imbalance farther down.
But the first thing to concentrate on is cleaning up your intestine.
Intestines, wow.
Well, Dr. Peat, I think we did pretty good today. Thanks for sticking around so long.
We really always enjoy talking to you.
So what are you going to have for Thanksgiving, like turkey and stuff and everything?
I think so, turkey or maybe a lamb roast.
Lamb roast or something, yeah.
And your newsletter, we'll put a link on our show if people want to get that for you.
How much is it? Very inexpensive, very affordable.
$28 by email.
For a year, right?
Yeah. I'd like to mention a book that people can find on.
It was written in 1905 called "Carbonic Acid in Medicine" by Achilles Rose and Robert Kemp.
It has some very interesting stuff about the history of therapeutic use of carbon dioxide.
Oh, cool.
It's just now starting the last five years to come back into medicine as a therapeutic anti-inflammatory.
Carbon dioxide.
Yeah.
So the name of the book is "Carbonic Acid in Medicine" and the author?
Achilles Rose.
Rose. You can probably get it on Amazon or somewhere.
Yeah, it's free. I don't know exactly where I found it, but it is on the internet.
Oh, you can find it somewhere.
Yeah, for no cost.
It's pretty interesting that all our political heroes want to tax CO2, so I am not sure what that's about.
I mean, it's so good for you. Why would you tax it?
Don't worry. You don't have to respond to that.
Dr. Peat, thank you. We love your work and we love you, sir.
You take care and we'll see you next month, okay?
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. Bye.
Bye.
He didn't have to mess around with that one.
Yeah. Well, great fun.
I get so many emails about Dr. Peat and having him on the show and we're glad to do it.
He's just a great guy to talk to.
So, we are going to go out in the sun, thank you very much, and hang out there for a while.
The Real World of Money with Fred Dashefsky will be, he'll be here tomorrow.
And Fred Zinica, he stays on as best he can with everything that's been going on in his life.
And there's so much cool stuff to talk about with the money thing.
Let me find my slide that I want to take off.
So, he'll be here tomorrow.
And then we're going to talk to a gentleman, his name is Dan Root.
And he is really doing some interesting work with the sauna, with niacin and the flushing and the whole thing.
So, that'll be fun, a detox.
So, we're going to do that on Thursday, maybe somebody else.
So, thank you and appreciate you being here.
Please spread the word on NowThatWe'reVideo and even all the audio.
Remember, we have about 3,000 podcasts and audio on our website, One Radio Network.
And you can go there and put whatever you're interested in in our search function.
And it's a pretty good one.
I mean, it'll find a lot of things, either a particular thing like thyroid or detox or put a person's name in there.
You'd be surprised after 12 years on this show of how many people we've talked to.
So, we get folks a lot who'll say, "Why don't you have this person?"
And I always check my search engine first on our One Radio Network.
And generally, we've already talked to them.
But that doesn't mean we can't do it again.
So, if you have people you'd like to hear from, thanks for your ongoing support.
Please like us on Facebook and YouTube and subscribe and all that stuff, all that geeky stuff.
And that helps spread the word.
So, we'll talk about money tomorrow at 9 o'clock.
Bring your money questions to Facebook and also to One Radio Network.
And remember that you're doing the best you can.
I mean, regardless of what anybody says, you are doing the best you can.
We all are. Every moment, every moment, we're doing the best we can.
So, I love you all very much. Thank you.
And we'll see you tomorrow. OneRadioNetwork.com.
We are listener supported. One Radio Network.
[music]
[BLANK_AUDIO]